To try to bring this back to the realm of reality (and get me past my
"block" on this project), I thought I'd just aim for a basic outline.


Humans have natural urges and desires.  These are quite malleable as
they can be utilized to help other humans, hurt other humans or be
agnostic to other humans.  In the domain of reproduction, these urges
are often connected to the very core of our "selves."  I do not wish
to try to make headway in this arena (other than arguing against
violence and coercion, whether it is related to sexuality or anything
else).  But it is silly to continue "competing" with each other when
we are all able to communicate.  Let's instead cooperate with each
other in a fashion that attempts to minimize risk.

The way I see it, principles are primary, and goals will naturally
emerge (as principles are primarily constraining in their nature).

I've given my own principles (as best I understand them).  I believe
that it is useful and proper to set my principles as a "goal" in and
of themselves.  That is to say, principles should be what I aspire to,
not necessarily a record of how I have lived my life up until this
point.

The existing economy(ies) perpetuate our emotional tendencies (because
it's quite trivial for marketing people to play on these natural urges
we have in order to sell us stuff, services and even information) and
lock us in to an endless rat race, where we end up chasing our own
tails for the sake of status.



control

trust deception

money is not value

the business of business is not value producing, rather it's a
constraint -- if we remove it (or replace it with another), the
resulting patterns may be far more elegant, efficient, diverse, etc...


much (most? all?) potential is value-neutral, as in it may be put to use in the cause of a "good" purpose, and/or also in the pursuit of evil -- the only defense against the latter is 



I don't know when or if "the singularity" will occur.  Perhaps it'll
be soon (within a small number of years).  Perhaps it's still
centuries (or millenia) away.  Maybe it'll never happen.  Or maybe
we've already experienced many "singularities" (and we should expect
many more)?  Nevertheless, the "prompt" for submitting this chapter is
a good one.  It's very useful (to me) to think about our human
economy(ies) and how we might try to tweak the structure(s) of our
society(ies).

We compete with each other "naturally".  My strong feeling is that the
most basic manifestation of this competition has to do with
status-seeking behavior (which is strongly linked with reproduction --
I believe that we're all hard-wired to desire a high-status mate (or
mates)).  The strength of these urges makes total suppression of our
status-seeking desires an unrealistic option.  But if we understand
them, then we do have a chance to mediate our choices and explicitly
*decide* for ourselves what behaviors, attributes, possessions,
lifestyles, etc... we wish to promote as "high status," rather than
simply collectively following "fashion" wherever it takes us.

A constraint was removed (from the concerns of most humans) recently.
We evolved in ecosystems where we were rarely (never?) the sole top
predator.  I believe any ecosystem with a single species occupying the
top predator slot is more fragile than any with multiple different
species of predators who all compete against each others in various
ways.  Our brains have evolved to fear being attacked and killed by
ferocious wild animals.  Now that there are so few actual wild animals
left that are any threat to any humans has of course caused our
population to blossom.  Any society that doesn't recognize this (and
evolve behavior and structure to explicitly counteract the exploding
polulation growth (and the hubris that our having "conquered" all of
our natural enemies provides, which is also a great danger)).

Our "instincts" cause us to lash out at each other when crowded
together, and also whenever any other resource besides physical space
is in short supply to the number of people who want and/or need it.
And this of course is one of the biggest questions.  What is the
difference between desire and necessity?

In the end, society as a whole plays a part in defining that
difference.  As society evolves, the line between the two moves.  What
once was a desire for many (most) of our ancestors is thought of as
necessary by all of the modern folk that I know here in the
northeastern US in 2013.  And even desires I had as a child are now
considered "necessities" by my own children.  And the realm of what
used to be "impossibly utopian dreams" moves into desires (many of
which have already become realized).  This is not a bad thing
inherently.  In fact, it's almost certainly key to all of the progress
we've made as humans and as human societies so far.  My concern is
with the way we have a tendency to blindly follow each other.  If we
realize that most of us are acting on emotional impulses rather than
as a result of rational thought in many of our actions, behavior and
communication, we can start to explicitly direct and control our
postures, fashion and conception of what exactly deserves to be given
status such that meta-goals are attained.

Here are the meta-goals that my personal principles produce:

 working towards equality of opportunity

 preventing violence

 preventing forceful coercion (as opposed to coercion through dialogue
 and education, which is tolerated, but not preferred)

 population control

 minimizing and mitigating pollution

 minimizing resource depletion

 providing educational opportunities to all humans

 sustenance of the earth as a vibrant living platform for all (not
 just human) life

Timothy Morton
Terrence Deacon
David Graeber
Richard Dawkins
