
I take the long view.  I'm not 100% sure there ever will be a true "singularity" in the sense of hard-takeoff or the like (though I do believe we've already had many, many singularities already (and we'll continue to have more)).  But whether or not it will ever happen, my gut tells me that it won't be for quite a while (hundreds, or perhaps even thousands of years), so I'm writing mainly about how we humans should attempt to work hard to allow less concentration of power (money) in the hands of a select few.  Certainly I believe that if my ideas are taken seriously that they would serve us well (definitely better than the current status quo) when viewed through the "eyes" of future machine intelligences.  Also, I confess that it's really mostly a matter of degree (in terms of how we view the idea of "singularity").  In some sense, we're almost living every moment as a singularity right now with the pace of technological advancement (my belief is that that will accelerate as more interdisciplinary work is done that ties together good work from differing fields). 

Interest is a very interesting word.  Can I separate my interest from my "self-interest"?  Much of modern capitalist theory involves accepting that people will act in their own "self-interest".  This assumption depends on each person making decisions based only on rational thinking.  But we all know that's not what happens.  Many of us act based on emotion, which may or may not align with what is logical.  In fact, there is a huge sector of our current first-world economy that is built on exploiting that dichotomy for profit.  It's called advertising.  And it seeks to tap into the emotional parts of our brains and convince us to purchase items and services that may or may not be useful to us.  I think it's valuable to try to remove the "self" from the equation and instead look more directly at what is in our collective interest as human beings.  It's true that we're all individuals, and so there is no absolute consensus.  But it seems to me to be much more useful to look at history as well as the current state of affairs and agree on some goals for society/humanity and optimize our system and environment based on those collective aims, rather than optimizing for the ability for some minority to be able to consolidate (and hoard) resources without any realistic limit.

Capitalism needs de-fanging.  I don't want to abolish it entirely but I think we *have* to address some of its shortcomings (as a life-directing paradigm).  Short-term and local outlooks are two of the most obvious flaws.  Preventing the exploitation of natural resources is a goal that has been at odds with raw capitalism.  And it's too important an issue not to address.  Also, we need to look at how capitalism has basic tenets that just don't make much sense.  With a capitalist system, constraining supply leads to greater profits.  Unless resources are constrained, we should not ever be giving incentives to restricting supply.  In practice, there's a lot of secrecy involved in attempting to carry this out (by having proprietary algorithms, recipes, processes, etc... that aren't shared ("trade secrets")) which is in the end counterproductive.  At some point in the past, someone made the argument that "intellectual" property needed to be protected like physical property had previously in order to "stimulate innovation".  Whether or not that made sense in the past, I think it's patently obvious in the present that we have plenty of innovation.  There is no need for artificial barriers that encourage individuals and organizations to keep information secret.  Physical goods and information are not equivalent.  And we should not treat them equally, legally or otherwise.  It may be that those who create information and then refuse to share it with everyone else can continue to gain a temporary advantage in the near future.  I believe that correcting that (and leveling the playing field so that those who do choose to share openly aren't placed at a disadvantage) is a very important goal.  I have no wish to "prevent" people from keeping secrets.  All of us should be free to do so.  I just want to change the incentives for that behavior somewhat.  In the US, there are many laws involved around patents/copyrights/etc... that I believe should be changed.  The success of the Swedish Pirate Party gives me hope that this might eventually be doable.  The entrenched interests are probably not going to give up easily.  One thing that I do think is very important with information is to retain authorship (and other meta-data) systematically.   That is, it is wrong to "steal" information (claiming to have created something that someone else has created), but not wrong to share information when authorship (or discovery, or ...) information is maintained and carried along effectively and reliably.  If authorship information has been lost, the information should not be discarded though.  Current cryptographic tools are capable (if not yet particularly user-friendly) of providing a trustworthy chain to aid with these goals.  Many ontological systems are capable of carrying "meta" information along side the first-order "information" (whether it's a piece of prose, code, music, DNA sequence, scientific process,  etc...) and authorship (provenance) is just a small part of that extra meta-information).  

Giving people as much freedom to choose their own path as possible and understanding that as humans, we are programmed (via our DNA by evolution) to be productive, it seems obvious to me that we could all be living far more harmoniously with nature and each other than we are currently.

I believe that education is the key to the future.  My goal involves finding a way to educate *all* of our children.  There is an inherent tension here because in some sense, education is control.  We expect that after people "learn" this will hopefully help them change some of their behaviors.  My goal is not to indoctrinate everyone.  I prefer that we help each other learn to think so that we all come to reasonable conclusions through our own means (rather than having ideas forced or imposed upon us by an authority).  As humans, we are capable of being incredibly manipulative (see my earlier example of the advertising industry).  I don't propose that we try to outlaw manipulation, but rather that we all learn to recognize it and that we all feel perfectly comfortable in pointing it out to others when we see (or even suspect) it.

Much of human history has involved some fraction of the population performing much of the labor that allows a (usually smaller) elite group to enjoy lives of comparative comfort and leisure.  So far as I can tell, capitalism has mostly made this problem worse, not better.  I'm totally convinced that there are circumstances where it would be beneficial to set prices of some items (and perhaps services) directly (rather than allowing market fluctuations to determine them). 

Status is mostly about one's connections to other people.  One can "buy" such status with enough money (to pay a staff, give gifts to others, etc...) but one can also develop deep lasting connections with other people (and therefore gain status) without money.  I believe that we should actively try to promote the latter over the former.

I believe that how we learn is perhaps the most important thing.  And many of us learn by playing games.  I believe that efforts to create new and better games are incredibly important.  I'm talking mostly about games that go beyond pure technology and include activities in the real world (such as "sports").  The goal of these games is just as important as the rules.  We want game players to learn how to cooperate.  Hackeysack does a wonderful job of this, as there is no "opposing team" in hackeysack.  Everyone works together towards a common goal (keeping the sack from coming to rest on the ground without using hands).  The fact that the ruleset for hackeysack is minimal is also a wonderful thing.  There are only three rules: no serving to onesself, no using hands and no saying "sorry".  The way I learned included a single penalty for breaking any of the three rules.  Any opposing player is allowed to respond to a rule breaking by throwing the sack hard at the offender's chest.  

Many of our games are oppositional (that is, the game is played "against" another person or team).  I'm not against this in principle, but I am in favor of very carefully thinking the rules through so that the "lessons" of the game don't simply involve exploiting any perceived weaknesses of ones opponent.  Because I'm fairly certain that the usual team sports (basketball, baseball, football, soccer, etc...) have contributed to many of us internalizing "competition" to mean overpowering and/or dominating the opposition.  I believe that this ethos/mindset has permeated "business" to the point that many "players" see the capitalist environment as a game to be "won".  Because the "rules" of capitalism are created (and modified) by those who hold wealth (i.e., those who've already "won"), we find ourselves in a situation where many people are constantly struggling against each other (rather than cooperating for mutual gain).  Every person obviously wants to improve his/her own position.  If we could all understand that it's not a real gain when this is done at the expense of others (or of our environment) then I believe that we could collectively do far better for all as a society/race/planet.  I think the best way to learn this is for us to invent new games that will teach this to future generations through action (as opposed to "passive" learning).

I think it's useful to look back at our history as well.  We evolved as hunter-gatherers.  And many of our inherent skills and instincts are directly related to that past (and hunter-gatherer groups don't scale well -- a single family-tribe-group can only get so big before the environment won't support large numbers and some faction needs to split and move elsewhere).  Agriculture and animal husbandry begat modern civilization, but they are relatively recent occurrences (at least when thinking of things on an evolutionary timescale) and so we humans have not changed much (genetically) since we've (mostly) moved away from our hunter-gatherer past.  Interestingly, we've managed to effect changes in many other species in that short time by purposefully selecting (according to our human needs (and also our emotions)) traits in plants and animals.  But this is human-directed genetic manipulation of those species, which is subtly different than natural selection (human plant or animal breeders can tray many different combinations every year and intentionally destroy all the offspring except a tiny percentage -- in this way traits are found (and bred for) "quicker" than they would be in a "natural" environment), as we get to choose traits we approve of (rather than having them selected simply for "survivability" (which is of course completely dependent on the environment)).  If one looks at the changes which we've made in the behavior of domesticated animals, the one universal is that we've bred the "wildness" out of all of these species to allow us to easily dominate them.  And as with our games and sports, the "pattern" of this behavior is something that we've continued to learn and strengthen.  It is my belief that this is a very very important effect.  As tribal hunter-gatherers, having a strong leader (and allowing that leader to dominate the tribal/family group) was paramount to the success of the tribe.  And so our "instinct" to dominate is absolutely a part of our DNA.  While we have mostly managed to remove the sharpest edges of that fact (for instance, there are very few human societies in 2013 that tolerate slavery), we haven't managed to really find an effective way to "scale up" our groups because of the tendency towards hierarchical structures (with a dominant leader at the top directing everything that huge numbers of individuals do).  I think that gender issues have played a major part in this as well.  Because of the fact that male humans are (on average) larger then female humans, that pattern of dominance has often played out in many one-to-one relationships between individual men and individual women.  We still battle that legacy and would do well to recognize that it is holding us back.  

We will perhaps never get rid of the "instinct" to dominate, but I do believe that it can be purposefully directed for the benefit of all of us.  We need to understand that control and domination is inherently counterproductive (especially with our huge (and still quickly growing) global population.  I suggest that we should teach ourselves, each other and especially our kids to direct these instincts to dominate and control towards the creation (and open sharing) of information.  In some ways this is already starting to happen.  Many of our heros are people who have used their minds to help advance the collective state of human knowledge.  Let's actively continue to reward those who think, whether they are scientists, artists, musicians, writers or whatever.  And let's stop idolizing politicians, business leaders and others who continue to cling to the old paradigm of dominance and control.

Ownership is obviously a direct consequence of that paradigm of dominance and control (and there's really nothing "natural" about the concept at all).  While I don't think it's productive to attack every aspect of ownership, there is one detail that I feel is very very important.  Originally, ownership was about actual physical items which could be touched and held.  As our information society developed, that idea was extended to include ideas.  I believe that we need to reverse that last part.  Ideas and information can and should be shared widely. 

In taking the long view, assuming the role of "parent" (and grandparent, great-grandparent, etc...) seems obviously the right approach.  And certainly I think it's worth explicitly pointing out that anyone can mature into this role (and not just those of us with biological offspring), whether through the role of adoptive parent, or through a "wider" interpretation (caring about all of the people around us, and therefore the young ones (and their future children) too).

One thing evolution has given us (as family groups and tribes have been a part of much of recent [proto]human evolution) is the sense of the "other" that we actively oppose.  I think that we do well to try to minimize that instinct (or confine it to be played out only in games, sport or art). There is really simply no reason to "deomonize" other people.  But how to combat this?  The fact that many of us don't have complete control over our emotions means that unscrupulous others are able to take full advantage of this for profit (by selling us things we don't need).  So part of the answer is obviously to try to help everyone be more self-aware and able to let rationality prevail in our behavior, but I think it's also possible to try to build a community of people who explicitly reject such manipulation (and will gently point it out).

While I clearly see the problems of our current society, my vision of the path we need to take in order to solve these problems is less clear.  But I don't want to do it alone (in fact I doubt I can), but it's my hope that others share my passion and will collaborate to take some of these ideas further and develop specific strategies in order to effect change (which will not be easy -- those who have accumulated wealth (and my impression is that most of those people believe very strongly that they've "earned" that wealth and therefore "deserve" it)).

Let's come together around some common goals and work to change humanity.  Our basic principles are:

tolerance
active opposition of domination and/or control
respect for (and reasonable treatment of) our environment (on and off-planet)
understanding the scientific method (and anchoring our actions with best current knowledge provided by science)
openness and transparency wherever possible

It's obvious to me that I'm not the only one thinking this way.  I just happened across http://neweconomicsinstitute.org/publications/five-principles-2020 which is from 2008, but seems to concentrate on many of the same 