Games provide a way to practice "letting go" and giving up some control (in some games, we may "feel" in control, but in many others, we may not (and so we're subject to the "control" of the rules and/or opponents/teammates actions/behavior)).



and those who disdain games?



we have created so many arrangements and structures around "ownership" that I believe need to be dismantled/rearranged

we revert to aggressive ZSG thinking when stressed

the "gamelike" aspect of dealing with money leads us to optimize primarily for this dimension (accumulation of cash/capital)  --  the danger here is that we feel the "rules" are on the side of any endeavor that can generate profit -- but life is much more complex, and externalized costs have very important impacts (despite the fact that many of us feel that such issues are "not our responsibility" due to the existing rules/laws which allow (and sometimes encourage) truly irresponsible behavior/actions)

given two ways of making an equal amount of money, the one which does the least harm is superior




As humans, we have an innate drive to probe boundaries, find (and surpass if possible) limits and to try to exploit opportunities.  In addition to the "natural" constraints imposed on us externally, we humans have also attempted to create additional "societal" rules in order that we may live alongside each other (hopefully peacefully).  But there's a very different "tone" to the nature of these "artificially created" constraints.  Because they aren't "absolute" (in the sense that the natural "laws" such as gravity are) and so we are not "fully bound" in the same way as we are with respect to natural laws (though as science progresses, one can make the argument that even the "natural" laws may not prove to be as "absolute" as we once thought).  

I have all sorts of questions about what "boundaries" any future machine intelligences may or may not recognize.  If we try to impose "limits" on such entities by encoding basic "laws" in their software, we have no true assurance that these entities won't self-modify in order to remove such "limits" on their behavior, action, thinking, etc...  But I'm not an expert on AI, so I'll leave this problem for others to solve and concentrate on the same issue, but with respect to us humans, not our machine progeny.

As a child, I was an absolute lover of games.  My dad taught me to play poker before I was 5.  I understood the rules pretty quickly (even the implicit rule of the necessity of hiding one's reaction to one's own hand).  I also loved other card games (blackjack, pitch, canasta, and a bunch of other different versions of solitaire), board games, and sports of all types (basketball, baseball, football, hockey, soccer, volleyball, etc...).  There is something comforting about having the same set of rules apply to all players.  I realize now that one of the main reasons for this appeal is that one doesn't get the same benefit in life.  For a myriad of reasons, different people get vastly different treatment in life.  

But games can teach us everything we need to know.  I propose that life can be viewed as a  game on many levels simultaneously.  



I think it's useful to look at how rules apply in games.  Some games have referees or umpires making certain decisions (and helping with enforcement of the rules).  But other games rely on the players themselves to enforce the rules without any "impartial" individual to help.  One of my favorite games, ultimate [a] is a team sport that has no outside enforcement beyond the participating players (though in 2005 the presence of impartial "observers" has been brought into some of the highest levels of competition, I play with a group of people who follow the original rules (no observers; all rules are completely enforced by the players on the field)).  By the way, the rules to ultimate are fairly complex [b].  There are 19 sections (in the current 11th edition of the rules), each of which has a significant amount of detail.  But the real brilliance is the "spirit of the game" rule, which is very meta [c].  From the 11th edition: 

   Spirit of the Game: Ultimate relies upon a spirit of sportsmanship that places the responsibility for fair play on the player. Highly competitive play is encouraged, but never at the expense of mutual respect among competitors, adherence to the agreed upon rules, or the basic joy of play. Protection of these vital elements serves to eliminate unsportsmanlike conduct from the Ultimate field. Such actions as taunting opposing players, dangerous aggression, belligerent intimidation, intentional infractions, or other "win-at-all-costs" behavior are contrary to the spirit of the game and must be avoided by all players.

As far as humanity's past, I believe that our minds have evolved to excel at games and puzzles.  I will dwell on the two primary mechanisms.  First off, the task of surviving (and thriving) to maturity and pairing in order to mate has a lot of game-like qualities.  It's quite a complicated process, as both partners are actively seeking to provide the best genes for their offspring (driven by our brains, which were designed by evolution).  I found Matt Ridley's book _The Red Queen_ held a lot of insights on this topic.  The second gamelike mechanism in our human past history is the task of procuring enough good food.  Early on, we were hunter/gatherers.  Both of those tasks are very gamelike (when hunting, we've even come to label our target quarry with the same name: game).  And it seems very obvious to me that efficiently locating and gathering berries, nuts or whatever else is available is also very game- or puzzle-like.


As is clearly explained by [d], there is an evolutionary process happening with technologies that is similar to (but qualitatively different from in some specific aspects) Darwinian evolution.  In brief, Arthur's contention is that technology builds itself out of itself (advances are commonly built out of component parts that are previously existing (more "mature") technologies).  And each advance creates opportunities and needs for even more future technologies that can address problems generated by current technologies.  I'm convinced that this gives us a great way to view the "technology" of capitalism.  Not that there isn't an awful lot of positive that has come from capitalism, but I think it's worth acknowledging its weaknesses.  The elephant in the room is that capitalism encourages everyone to optimise for "value." And in capitalist systems, value gets definied in monetary terms, which is not always appropriate, as true value is more than the price one pays for something. Sometimes the two are closely related; other times not so much.  And the model encourages each actor in the system to perceive the system as a zero-sum-game, thereby explicitly permitting exploitation of other humans (and the environment, etc...) as a valid strategy that is supposed to have a Darwinian effect on the whole kit and kaboodle, promoting the strong and somehow "weeding out" the weak, yada, yada, yada.  I think most of that is bullshit.  Yes, competitiveness can breed quality.  But it can (and does) also create dominance of a few over many and a ridiculous pursuit of secrecy (because knowledge itself is seen as an "asset" to guard and hold on to so that exploitation can continue (generating more profit)).  And the argument that those who've made a lot of money are better qualified to make decisions for the rest of us (which they absolutely do today, due to the inherent corruption of this aggregation of power) is very hollow, and doesn't stand up to meaningful scrutiny.  

In its current form, there are many gamelike aspects to capitalism.  But I'm not convinced that all the patterns we are "learning" from capitalism are truly productive to society and I'd like to believe there's a way to improve on that in the future (without abandoning capitalist principles entirely).

Many team sports (and individual competetive games) encourage "zero sum" thinking, i.e. the only way I (or my team) can win is if the opposing player (or team) loses.  Capitalism also encourages this way of thinking, allowing (and even encouraging) the exploitation of the (politically and/or socially) weak, whether as labor or as consumers.  I don't personally believe that reality must be like that.  Any given group of people will be able to accomplish more when they cooperate than they could if they each strive alone as individuals.    

One of the best lessons we can learn from games is how to accomodate players of varying skill level.  Everyone likes a "fair" competition.  But beyond skill level, there are also realities of varying physical and mental ability that can constrain our development of high-level skills.  Finding a way to include players with real handicaps in a way that remains "fair" to all may not always be easy, but with creative thinking, it can almost always be done (if we see this as a good reason to modify the "rules" of any game when necessary).  I find this aspect (of striving for inclusion of anyone who wants to participate) can counteract the strategy of "exploiting the weaknesses of opponents" in many competetive endeavors (even if I'm not yet sure how to apply this to capitalism itself -- though I'm convinced that thinking about and playing more games will lead to an answer here as well).

I think it's worth saying something about the ultra-competetiveness at the top level in (American) football, baseball, hockey, basketball, futbol (soccer), and probably many more sports I'm not familiar with.   Some of these games have become such a part of our society(ies) that they sometimes seem to "drive" us, even becoming a point of national or civic pride for the residents of locations that host the "winning" team(s) and inspiring people all over the world to take up and attempt to master these iconic games.  There is a meta-aspect of these games due to so many of us having an interest in their outcomes, filling stadiums, arenas and living rooms with cheering fans, many of whom seem to care as much about who wins as the participating atheletes.  And under the intense scrutiny of so many eyes, the focus on individual rules (and subtle nuances) shows us that there are still no absolutely perfect answers to these questions of boundaries, rules and gaining slight advantages by finding loopholes (or simply cheating and getting away with it).  The different sports have dealt with these questions in different ways.  Some have embraced technological advances (incorporating instant video replay into the rules of the game) and all attempt to have impartial umpires/judges/referees/officials to enforce "fairness".  But in the end, this effort is never perfectly effective.  There have been scandals of various sorts at the top levels of almost every sport over the years, and fans of any team that loses by a close margin will be able to provide arguments as to why their team *deserved* to win (usually invoking a mistake (or multiple) by an official(s), but sometimes creatively finding a different "reason").

If the only goal to a game is winning (and certainly people who approach games this way can be found easily), then there are diminishing returns of enforcement and the player behavior will always adapt to rule changes by looking for edge cases to exploit (or any way to get an advantage undetected).  By viewing the game's goals as more nuanced though, including such aims as enjoyment, camraderie, exercise, and mental training, even a competetive game can be enjoyed by everyone (not just the winning team/player).  And here I think we have an opportunity to extend this metaphor beyond the game to life itself.  In the same way that we realize that a competetive game can bring us pleasure whether we win or not, it should be obvious that we can find value in life beyond what we are capable of accumulating and "selling" to others.


Games are not the only way to relieve stress, but I think that playing good games can do a great job at bringing us back to a calmer baseline state over the long term.  This is extremely important, because in my experience, we humans tend to revert to aggressive zero-sum-gain behavior when under stress.  So the more ways we have to safely relieve stress, the better.  And of course some games (especially the competetive ones) can actually induce/create stress.  Which is not a bad thing if it's resolved.  If after a competetive endeavor, the players on both sides are able to feel good about knowing and interacting with their opponents, then it's all good.  However, when the competitors leave with animosity towards their opponents (or even their teammates), then I personally would not consider this to have been a successful game.  There may still be some positives to such an event, but there are definitely significant negatives, in terms of teaching the players (and those of us who observe) poor patterns of behavior.  Games have the potential to help teach us to override our base instincts and emotions even under high stress conditions. 

Let's make the real game of life more enjoyable.  We can do this by creating better games.  Another way to say this is that we need to examine our world and our societies and try to figure out where we humans are doing well and where we could use improvement.  Much of science can be utilized in this examination/analysis.  Looking at our daily behavior with an eye towards reducing destructive and/or polluting consequences is a good aim.  Creating specific game-like "goals" that support these future "meta" goals would seem to me a productive endeavor.  

Bitcoin is almost a perfect game [e].  The one thing that I would say is less than ideal is the "mining" process.  Not that it's bad, but it does encourage energy to be consumed in order to generate coins.  The task that the bitcoin creator(s) chose is to set miners to look for sequences of characters that, when hashed with SHA-256, produce resulting hashes with a certain number of leading zeros.  This is a computationally intensive process (and so there's no way to "cheat" other than to bring more computing resources to bear).  As far as I can tell, there is no possible "benefit" external to the bitcoin process of finding these rare strings which SHA-256 hash to values with leading zeros.  I don't have anywhere near a deep understanding of the details of bitcoin, but if it were possible to create a similar "digital currency" where the computational goal is one with external value (perhaps searching for cures for diseases, or efficient algorithms, or ...) then this resulting "game" would be almost perfect.  Of course, I have no reason to be sure that such an "improved" bitcoin is even possible, but the very existence of bitcoin in its present form is something that very few of us would have predicted (or believed possible).  At this point in time (2013) the bitcoin miners who are succeeding are battling with electrical power cost and efficiency (the competition has gotten so intense because so many people are trying to mine bitcoins).  And so the "energy" being consumed for this purpose is no longer insignificant.  Any energy consumed for this purpose (and associated pollution generated from power production where fossil fuels are being burned to generate that electricity) is "wasted" as we humans won't get any direct benefit from the "consumption" of energy other than more bitcoins.  Also, at its heart, bitcoin is a way to create a placeholder for monetary value.  Certainly I see this as far superior to other existing currencies (which are subject to manipulation by governments and other entities), but it still (at least partially) encourages the myth that every object has some fundamental "price" associated with it.



Efficiency can be a game, i.e. trying to optimize for some specific (or multiple) dimension(s).  Let me give a concrete example.  I accept implicitly (and have for some time) the goal of "reuse, repurpose, recycle".  This is a specifically ordered sequence too.  For those of you who may not be familiar with it, the idea is to try to reduce the "waste" stream of households/businesses/etc..., as any of those three options will remove part of the load on landfills/incinerators/etc...   The order is important, because continued reuse of something is the ideal solution (because it also takes a load off of manufacturing new objects of this type).  One way I personally "win" this game is that I rarely throw out milk jugs anymore.  Instead I wash them (with cold water, that's sufficient if the milk hasn't spoiled in the jug).  I then take the milk jugs down to my greenhouse. I built one in my back yard, an impulse that I would also argue was game-driven, as I'm now able to provide greens for myself and my family in the winter that are fresh (and mostly cost me my own labor, which is a labor of love as well).  My greenhouse is only heated by the sun, and those 1 gallon milk jugs filled with water collect that energy quite effectively when placed on shelves in my greenhouse.  Now I don't expect that this particular solution will go very far.  Probably relatively few people are able (and interested in?) build(ing) a greenhouse in their backyard.  But everyone can make up their own efficiency games that work for them and share them with others.  Perhaps some of you do have greenhouses and might now choose to implement my "milk jug" solution to capturing solar energy.

Another example of a possible "efficiency" to be leveraged by thinking of life as a game comes from my past when I worked on a farm.  Though this one is pretty much completely untested (unlike the milk jugs, which I've actually tried and so I know work well).  I've always been a huge fan of legumes (because of their ability to fix nitrogen in the soil as a "side effect" of the plant growth) and peas are also one of my favorite vegetables.  Traditionally peas have mostly been grown on a fence (because the plants are natural climbing vines), but they also grow well when seeded thickly in an area (and they basically climb each other when planted this way).  But peas grow best in cool weather, so here in the northeast US, that means in the spring.  And so harvest time is often right around the solstice which means a lot of sun and heat to contend with while picking (and bending down and picking produce is not a job very many people with other options want to do).  So my idea is to "harvest" peas by using a tractor to "scoop" up the entire plant (attaching pitchfork tines to the hydraulic "bucket" of a tractor would allow one to drive into a pea field and pull all the plants free from the earth).  This giant pile of greenery could then be brought to a more comfortable location (than a sunny field) for processing.  If a barn is not handy, a tent could also work well.  And the greenery could be put up on a table (removing the need for pea "pickers" to ever bend down) where people could easily pick all of the ripe peapods out of the foliage.  Ideally this would happen on a farm that also raises animals.  Cows, pigs, sheep and chickens will all eagerly eat the discarded greenery (from after the peas are picked out), in fact, this is an excellent food for all of those animals.  

In some ways, every job I've ever held in my life has been a game.  The object is to satisfy my boss(es) so that I don't get fired.  And there's of course the "meta" goal of needing to decide whether I can go find another job playing a game that's more fun (and hopefully pays more).  Much of my work recently with technology involves actively troubleshooting complex problems, designing and building systems, all of which are very gamelike activities as well.  In fact, my previous work outdoors on a farm really involved essentially the same thing.  Though the complexity of the problems I was asked to solve as a farmhand was significantly less.  Were I the owner or "manager" of a farm (rather than just a "worker"), that might not be true.  In my "gamelike" view of things, I wonder if it wouldn't make for a very satisfying way of living if everyone had not just 1, but rather many (at least a dozen or so) different jobs that we all work at (and derive income/value from).  The preconceptions about what "full-time" work is seem to be a serious impediment to working towards that solution.

But I think that we should all do work that we like.  I think that the performance of everyone would be universally higher (on average; I admit for the possibility of exceptions, but I suspect they would be very few).  Finding a way to "gamify" many of the important tasks of a society doesn't seem that hard a challenge to me.

When considering any game, here are some important "dimensions" to consider:   

 Ruleset size/complexity
The number (and complexity) of rules will vary from game to game.  All other things being equal, I'm of the opinion that fewer (and simpler) rules are better.  But there is a tradeoff here.  Some very good games have fairly complex rulesets, so this is not a dimension that should ultimately be optimized for at the expense of the other dimensions.

 Enforcement mechanism(s)
Relying on external enforcement (referees, umpires, etc...) is not as good as allowing a game to be self-enforced.  The key here is that one wants the enforcement mechanism to encourage the players to be completely honest 100% of the time.  This crosses over from the "explicit" rules in many games to the "meta" concept of sportsmanship.  And it's probably an ideal that will never be reached.  No matter how "pure" any game is, it's probably not hard to find someone who has tried to cheat at that particular game.  Obviously, the mental baggage that each player brings with her/him from her/his previous life experiences will have a great effect here as well.  As with the first dimension above, there is really no way to attain total perfection on this dimension.  But there is a minimum threshhold of "fairness" that all players must embrace (and which is generated by their understanding of and confidence in the enforcement mechanism(s)) in order for a game to be attractive to potential players.  
To some degree, relying on external enforcement of the rules (rather than allowing them to be self-enforced) encourages players to "selectively" follow the rules (i.e. only when they feel they are being observed by the referee(s)) if it will potentially give them an advantage.  The answer of "more referees" (to try to insure that nobody can do anything unobserved) doesn't seem to be a great solution to me.   As this thinking would make the "societal" non-game goal be a total panopticon.  I'm much more in favor of inculcating personal responsibility and trusting individuals to do the right thing (as opposed to growing police/security forces to the point where they're capable of enforcing standards of behavior for every human everywhere).

 Goal alignment (with truly useful endeavors)
This is the big one.  Where I think we've only barely scratched the surface so far.  I think that taking societal goals and building games around them has huge potential.  Let's make energy efficiency more of a game.  Many mundane tasks can be made more "game-like".  

 Interactivity (with other people)
At one end (the only end?) of the spectrum, are games like solitaire that only have a single player.  I personally find that I always try to make almost any task I need to accomplish into a game.  This is valuable (and I think that new single-person games can help us learn a lot) but as we drift away from that boundary (towards games that have more than one participant) I think that the potentials are even greater.  When we evaluate how much interaction there is, I think it's important to not just consider the numbers of players (and/or teams) involved, but also the spectators and fans.  Creating (or finding?) games that work well when played by huge numbers of people is probably a very good explicit goal.

 Cooperativeness
Others may disagree, but I think this is a pretty pure dimension.  Which is to say that the more cooperation is encouraged, the better the game.  There can still be games that are very good and useful which don't encourage cooperation, but with the way that our planet is connected, it seems quite obvious to me that there are many possibilities for creating games which encourage us to work together.  And being able to get along with everyone (even those we are "competing" against) is a very important lesson for humans to learn.

 Competetiveness
To some degree, every game has a competetive aspect (if there were no challenge, there would be no game), but it's important to realize that some games encourage competetiveness more than others.  As the paradigm that has brought us to this point (natural selection) is based on competition, I won't try to argue that it's a negative.   And many may disagree with me.  But that's fine.  My own predilection is to look to create games which are not solely hyperfocused on the competition aspect.  Others may create highly competetive games that have many positive benefits (we already have a bunch of these of course) and that's fine.

In some sense, the cooperativeness and/or competetiveness of a game is mostly determined by whether there is a zero-sum-gain model involved in the game.  Most directly competitive games use this model.  But out in the natural world, our dynamic ecosystem(s) are not necessarily zero-sum-gain, in that the interrelationships between all the different organisms produce a rich structure that can support far more than any "monoculture" occupying the same physical space ever possibly could.  So games that leverage cooperation in a way that allow teamates to combine their efforts (and have a more powerful effect than would be if "individual" efforts were added up) are especially important teaching/learning tools.

Most if not all humans have a drive to control the world around us.  Providing a healthy environment for our children to grow, learn and thrive in is (in my view) the ultimate root to this drive evolutionarily.  But when it comes down to the details, in the end, our vision of how much of the world around us is under our "control" may not match reality.  There is so much happening which is outside of our control.  And this problem is compounded by our exploding population.  Perhaps in the past, before we humans had overrun so much of the planet, it would have been possible for an individual person to exert slightly more control over his/her environment than is possible today.  But now there is the additional aspect of so many humans attempting to exert control over each other (and we've created so many societal rules, many of which expressly exist in order to attempt to control us), making it even harder for any single individual to successfully exert control over her/his environment.  Games have the ability to teach us better how to give up control.  When we engage in a game, we necessarily give up partial control to the rules of the game and also to any other participants (whether they are teamates or opponents).  Learning to embrace this state of affairs can and does teach us how to "let go" in the world beyond any specific game.  This is something that we are in dire need of.  Much too much of our daily activities and efforts are involved with attempting to exert control over each other.  I'm certain that without many of the "limits" we impose on each other, that our collective creative output would increase dramatically.  Perhaps actively promoting this aspect of game-playing can bring help get us closer to that goal.


I believe that some of the most important "work" of the future is the continued creation and "tuning" of new games.   And I encourage people to think outside the box in order to create games that interact with real concerns (and try to help solve real problems that have traditionally been "outside" the realm of games & play).  It's really important to look at games with regard to the strategies they engender.  Games that naturally encourage cooperation (and discourage "self-centered" thinking) are capable of building patterns in our minds that will extend to other non-game human interactions.

With the explosion of technology, now is a great time to create new games, as there are so many components, ideas and memes to use in constructing new games that the possibilities are seemingly limitless.  As a child, I always thought it would be great to combine some sort of exercise equipment (say a stationary bicycle) with a video game.  I assume by now many have at least jury-rigged such contraptions.  But this is a great combination of components to create a game with great meta-aspects (it would lead to the player being in better physical shape).  Along these lines, new meta-games have the potential to greatly benefit society.  I see this happening in two ways.  Games that have direct goals that are beneficial to society will obviously have immediate impacts.  But more importantly, the patterns learned from good games will benefit the rest of society outside the game when the players are engaging in other activities.

 -- the safe environment in which to act on instinctive urges becomes more and more necessary with the explosion of human population -- post-singularity, games may have machine "players" as well

Relatively simple rules can generate an amazing degree of complexity.  I'm speaking now in terms of the rules such as are encoded in ant DNA (and/or somehow propagated socially through the ant colony).  We can go farther and talk about natural laws (such as gravity, conservation of energy, etc...) and at this extreme, there is no way to "break" the law (or cheat) as is almost always possible in a game.  I think it's very useful to understand that we can attempt to evaluate the "strength" of constraints.  And I use the word constraint to mean the category (superclass) that includes all rules, laws, standards, regulations, etc...  The thing is that we're not ants.  Our DNA has given us the ability to think (and our culture/society has taught us language and much more that has amplified and honed that capacity for thought) for ourselves.  So our societies can be more directed than ant societies.  Or at least directed in different directions.  By deciding (as a society(ies)) to adopt different standards and rules, we have the ability to shape the societies of the future (even perhaps within our own lifetimes, though I don't believe that's certain).  We should think very hard about all the rules, standards and regulations that we attempt to implement and enforce.  

I believe that primitive societies can inform our thinking.  The idea that one must not waste seems (to me as a layperson, not an anthropologist) to be a thread that runs (ran) through the central thinking of many tribes/groups throughout history.  Capitalism has been so successful (and our societies have mostly moved beyond tribal patterns quite some time ago) that we've now produced so many "consumers" that we're in danger of "wasting" many of the incredibly valuable resources of our home planet.  Others may argue that we *must* move into space, because this is an inevitable result (that earth will become almost uninhabitable for one reason or another due to human overpopulation).  I'm fully supportive of exploring space, but I think that's it's silly to give up on the earth without trying a lot harder to save her (and us).

In my view, evolutionary natural selection is far more "natural" than capitalism (though the concepts involved are similar).  This is because "survival and reproduction" is much more of a "pure" goal than is the accumulation of wealth.  But we can use this to our advantage and attempt to impart and share the view that "tallying capital" is not the only way to keep score in life.  Much of what truly has value to us lies beyond the ability of capitalism to correctly assign a "price".  And so much of what many of us appreciate the most comes for "free" (or at least without a high monetary cost).  Let's look at a friendship for instance.  Rarely will such a relationship cost much money, though we may spend other things that are valuable to cultivate it (time, effort, communication, etc...).

The specific goal that I see in front of us (and that I'd like to try to work on, but that I also *know* is too big for me to solve alone) is to find a way to "tweak" the capitalist paradigm somehow so that it's far harder for people/corporations to profit from extracting resources (or using manufacturing process, or ....) in a way that destroys our natural environment(s).  Unfortunately I don't have any more detail yet than what I've explained above.  But I'm convinced that there are solutions lurking if we look hard enough.  Please hit me on twitter @ernstdoubt if you are interested in helping, have a suggestion, or just want to offer encouragement and/or support.

When rules are imposed by other humans (or by ourselves), we tend to look for ways that those rules can be bent (or broken completely).  I think this is part of human nature.  And so for any rule or constraint that is imposed on human society, there will always be some fraction of the population that doesn't obey the rule(s).  My belief is that if we can agree on the importance of our goals, and convey these ideas to young people, that many of us will choose to live our lives according to societal rules without needing (as much) external enforcement.

There's another aspect to "rules" that I think is worth mentioning, and that has to do with our social nature.  I'm not sure what the threshhold is, but it seems to me that when enough of a fraction of the population ignores or breaks a specific rule, this leads to many more of the rest of us also following and choosing not to respect that specific rule.  This applies to society itself (as well as to games individually).  And the conclusion I come to is that self-enforcement is far superior to external enforcement (wherever this is possible -- sometimes it may be necessary to retain external enforcement).  But again, I think that games can teach us how to relate to rules in society.  If it's possible to modify the rules of a game (for whatever reason), it's also possible to modify the rules of society.  Whenever we have rules that we see people choosing to break on a large scale, it should give us pause and cause us to reevaluate whether those rules might be modified or improved.

It's OK not to like a particular game.  I'm not very fond of golf, but I try to be tolerant of all the beautiful real estate that golf courses use up.  And I take some solace in the fact that at least golfers (and spectators, caddies, etc...) are interacting with the "real world" in a visceral way.  My answer is that we should just have a lot of games to choose from.  And let us all play the one(s) we want.

What is a rule?  What does a boundary mean? When given a choice of several options, how should we choose?  These are all incredibly important questions.  I think that by exploring games, we have the ability to find better answers, though that's certainly not the only possible route to "success" (whatever that means).


Live within Resource limits, pollute less, and consume only products or produce that do not add to the suffering of others.

The physical world around us presents us with number of "hard" contraints (gravity, conservation of energy, etc...) that (until our technology/science advances far beyond its current state) provide rules that are essentially unbreakable.  But when we look more closely at life on the surface of the earth, we realize that the complexity and interrelationships between species and ecosystems are incredibly complex.  Our human presence on this planet is inducing change in many of these systems.  Some of this is done intentionally (when we build a large dam or introduce genetic modifications in various species for whatever reason) but much more is done as a side-effect or more indirectly due to us creating pollution sources, killing local flora (and perhaps causing erosion), our travel introducing vectors for species (and diseases) to move more widely and quickly, potentially reducing the diversity that existed before our human population exploded/explodes.  

 
Up until now I have avoided the mention of specific groups or organizations such as businesses, governments, churches, and similar existing constructs.  I think that with the technological connectivity possibilities of today's (and tomorrow's) world, we have the potential to come together in new ways that try to take the best from those older and established organizational paradigms and avoid the pitfalls specific to each.  I am hopeful that new inclusive social structures will allow us to continue to improve our relations with each other as we search for the modern equivalents of the "tribe".

We collectively agree on societal rules and (if any) mechanisms for enforcement of those rules.  However, deception is something that almost all humans learn to use as a tool.  And many of us get a "rush" from activities that provide us with the ability to take a risk.  So I think we should recognize as a starting point that any societally imposed rule will never be obeyed by 100% of humans.  But that's OK, and we shouldn't be bothered by that reality, rather we should seek to create rules that have the best chance of being universally obeyed.  Rules that are obviously in everyone's best interest *should* (if my thinking is correct) have a much higher percentage "natural" buy-in by most of us (and therefore a lot less effort would be "wasted" on enforcement efforts for any rules that can mostly be self-enforcing).  I think that by playing good games, we can naturally reinforce this tendency.  When playing a game, we learn the value of everyone playing by the same set of rules.  And this I think gives us a great path towards building a universal set of "rules for life" (which will probably be modified and improved constantly) that most of us will follow, as we realize the enormous benefits of cooperating and working together. 

Let's consciously think about the games we play (and watch) and the patterns that they teach us.  Let's keep playing games.  Let's keep challenging (and sometimes changing) the rules to improve our games.  And let's create radically new kinds of games that will teach us the right lessons about how to deal with our selves and each other.  But most of all, let's understand what really has true value (and how that's not necessarily always directly related to monetary cost/price/expense/whatever).


[a] http://www.usaultimate.org/index.html
[b] http://www.usaultimate.org/resources/officiating/rules/11th_edition_rules.aspx
[c] http://www.usaultimate.org/about/ultimate/spirit_of_the_game.aspx
[d] The Nature of Technology: What it is and How it Evolves by W. Brian Arthur  Free Press, A Division of Simon and Schuster, 2009
[e] http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
